Hi, my name is Joe Cheng
I'm the CTO of Posit and today I'm going to talk to you about harnessing LLMs from code
in the service of data analysis
This talk is intended for people who know how to code in either R or Python
I'm assuming that you have used LLMs via something like chat-gpt or copilot, cursor or windsurf
But I've also assumed that you have not written code that calls LLMs
That you have not called LLM APIs
If you have a lot of experience using LLMs from code
Maybe you're also just interested in Posit's take on these tools in which case welcome to you as well
So as we're getting started with LLMs, there's a couple of things you need to know right up front
One is that LLMs are generally accessible these days through HTTP APIs
There are other ways to call LLMs than through HTTP APIs, but I don't think there are any other ways that matter
This is the way most models are accessed today
Therefore Posit has created packages that are designed to make it really easy to call LLMs through these HTTP APIs
And we're going to talk a lot about these packages today. For R, there's Elmer and for Python, there's Chatless
So as we are getting started using these LLMs, let's just set our expectations correctly
First of all, you can expect that this is going to be super easy as we get started
Elmer and Chatless are both extremely easy to use
These models, the best models out there at least, the best LLMs are highly capable and they're getting better all the time
So if that's not your expectation
Maybe because you haven't used these models in a while or you haven't
sort of persevered through
seeing them make mistakes
Just know that they're quite good at a lot of things these days and they are extensible
We're going to talk today about some ways that we can add our own behaviors and even add code
Well code in a way to these models
However, these models do make mistakes and they make them a lot and not only do they make mistakes. They do them unpredictably
Nondeterministically, which makes it even more frustrating. I
Think in summary today, you know May 2025 these LLMs have a jagged frontier
I think that's a term you're gonna hear more and more
There are things that they are surprisingly good at
Even shockingly good at and then things that they are really surprisingly bad at so as we
Explore them. Let's just let's just expect to be surprised in both directions
So I have a couple of tips as well for how we should not approach getting started with playing with LLMs
First of all, you may have heard a lot about local models or open weights models
These are models that you can download to your own machine or your own server and run them
I highly recommend that you do not start with them and instead start with the very best models that the world has right now
Those are clod 3 7 sonnet or actually as of today clod 4 sonnet
Open AI has a number of state-of-the-art models that are sort of have different trade-offs and Google Gemini 2.5 is I've heard very good
the the open weights ones like
llama and its derivatives
quen
Deep seek. They're just not as good as you have heard. I'm sorry. Sorry, not sorry. I
Also suggest that as you're getting started
Don't start with non public information or data. Don't start with your customer data. Don't start especially with patient data
I'm like in this
Instead as you're getting to know these API's
Do it with low stakes publicly available or just non proprietary data
And only after you get a good sense of how to use these API's and have a good sense for how they work
Then you can think about security and data privacy and whether it's safe for you to use
Non-public data
so
To get started. We're going to need to do a couple things
the by far most annoying part of this is
We need to sign up for a developer account with anthropic or open AI or Google if you want to go the Gemini route
And you need to grab an API key
It's pretty simple to do this if you just
Go to their site and sign up, but it does require a credit card
These sites generally will not work will not allow you to make API calls without putting down a credit card and paying a few dollars
All I have to say is just do it already. I mean, I know this stops a lot of people from proceeding
It's just enough of a pain enough friction
But it is really worth pushing through this
Step and it really is not going to be a lot of money. You can do a lot of experimentation
with just you know $20 that might last you a couple months of
Quite intense playing with these models
Once you have that API key
Then you need to add it to your environment variables and I have links that I'll drop in the description for doing that
For both are for Python and then it's time to install an LLM client package for our there's Elmer and for Python
There is chat lists. I just say no when you go to use chat lists. It may ask you as you
Try to connect it may ask you to install other packages depending on what provider you're using. So just be aware of that
So this is sort of the hello world of using Elmer. This is the our version
You can see here. It's extremely short. There's just basically two lines of code here the first
Creates a chat object
Calling this chat anthropic function and passes in the model that we want to speak with
This is club 3.7 sonnet and we are asking for the latest version
You could change this from chat anthropic to chat open AI and put in an open AI model identifier
And now you're chatting with with open AI neither case. You have this client object that you get back
We often refer to it as a chat object and you call the chat method on it and pass in your question and you get
A response. So in this case summarize the plot of Romeo and Juliet and it does so
Another interesting thing about this client variable is it is not just a way to ask questions
It is a way to carry on a conversation
So you can call chat multiple times and each subsequent call is like the next question in this ongoing conversation
So here I say now Hamlet, this is just this is not just me asking context-free this model
Hey model now Hamlet. It is a follow-on to the previous question about Romeo and Juliet
So it knows how to answer with a summary of 20 words or less
This is the example in R and then
This is the example in Python. It is almost identical. You can see here that the
Capitalization has changed because I'm calling a Python constructor instead of an R function
But other than that, it's it's extremely similar
So a few things to know about Elmer and chat lists number one
They support many different LLM providers
Pretty much all the ones that we can get our hands on and this is really important because you want the ability
To experiment with different model providers and just kind of see
Whether there are certain things that one provider does better than another
Secondly you have the ability to
have a chat and then take that chat object and just print it at the console or in a Jupyter notebook and you'll be able to
View the conversation history
Just by printing the object
Third both Elmer and chat lists have built-in chat UIs
And in fact, they each have two
Two built-in chat UIs one for a web browser and one for the console and I'll show you real quick how that works
So for example, let's take that Romeo and Juliet example and instead of
doing this at
The console let's do it in an app
So we can say
So we can ask this question
and
Yeah, very convenient to be able to do this in in a web
interface or maybe instead of a web interface you prefer a console interface and
I'm continuing the conversation here. I can say like how about
Hamlet
And there you go streams the answer back
Okay, so super easy to use and designed to work really well interactively
But that's not actually that interesting right it's not that interesting for us to take a bone stock
LLM that you already have a web interface for that. You could just go to claw.ai
Instead we want to be able to customize these models and the first way we often want to customize them is by adding knowledge
So we want to tell these models something that they don't know
from the factory
Just a quick couple of
Discouragements here you may have heard a lot about rag. I recommend that you do not start there
It is a very useful technology
But I don't think it's the one you should be starting with same thing even more so with fine-tuning
You may have heard this term
I recommend you do not start there either when you want to add knowledge the first place you should start is with system prompt customization
It is easy. It is effective. It's super quick
whereas these other techniques take a little bit of
fiddling
so here is one example of
of
Adding some information via
The system prompts
Okay, so
What the system prompt is is a way of us telling the model that for this interaction or for this conversation?
These are the ground rules that I want you to obey
In this case, we're saying you're a bot that answers questions based on this expense policy doc
and I have an expense policy doc here that is actually for a fictional company called example Inc and
Really boring right? It's saying here's what is eligible for expensing when you're traveling when you're visiting
Clients when you're buying office supplies
super boring
But important to get right
So here I'm creating a string that says you're a bot that answers questions based on this expense policy doc
And then I put in some like XML tag looking things
This is just to organize all the lines. I'm about to paste in and then I put in this entire doc
I literally copy and paste this doc into
this system prompt string
and then I have a couple more follow-up bullet points site policy section numbers and use examples when helpful and
Now I can take that system prompt and pass it as an argument when I create a chat object and
now
When I do that the answer
Incorporates the knowledge from that document. So in this case, can I expense a programming book?
It says based on the expense policy. It might be
Ask ask your manager section 3.4. Okay, so
That is maybe not the most
data analysis oriented example
So let's do one that is a little bit more in the vein of data analysis. So for this one
Maybe you can relate to this experience that I've had multiple times where?
There's a data set that I'm very excited to get my hands on in this case
It's the college scorecard data that the the federal government puts out and it has a lot of information about different
characteristics of colleges and universities
as well as a lot of I think data from the IRS about
The outcomes that students experience six years and ten years after they graduate so really rich data set
There's just one problem with this data set
So, let me let me bring up what the data actually looks like
Got this
CSV here
And if we look in positron
there are
thousands of columns and
These are quite impenetrable
column names and
The data dictionary is 800 kilobytes of Excel spreadsheets. I mean, it's just a lot
So what I've done here is I've taken that those
That data dictionary that Excel data dictionary and I've used Claude code to come up with sort of a condensed summary as a
Markdown file and now I have created a system prompt that says you're a bot that helps data analysis for college scorecard data
Do not attempt to analyze the data, but you can write our code
I'm telling it to use the read our package to read CSVs
And that assume that the CSV files are in the working directory and then I read in the entire
The
Entire file I have that summarizes this data and you can see it talks about
hundreds of available variables
And this actually works
awesome
So I'm able to
Run this example and I can ask a question like what are some demographic variables?
You
All right, pretty cool
And by the way note what we did not do here
we did not actually
load the
College scorecard data
Into the LLM and ask it to start answering data questions. We did not do that
We asked it to write code and there's a really a good reason for that
Because on their own the LLM themselves are terrible at analyzing data like they simply are
Not suited for this task
So if you load up data in into them in the format that they understand best, which is maybe JSON
They are actually
Not able to reliably do even simple arithmetic
In fact, they cannot even reliably count rows in a data frame
In fact just today. I tried it with a small CSV
299 rows loaded it into
Claude
v4
The the latest that just came out today and it said that there were
216 rows so we cannot trust them on their own
Instead what we can almost trust them to do is have them write code that analyzes data and sometimes even
Let the LLM have enough control that it can execute the code for you
And that that is a much much better way to have LLMs help us with data tasks
We want them to write code that then gets executed
So those last two examples only really involved adding
Knowledge what they did not really involve very much of was customizing behavior
So let's use our system prompt again and just by putting some different instructions there we can have
The these LLMs act in quite a different way than just a general assistant in this case
I'm gonna say like you're a dungeon master for
Dungeons and Dragons style game whose theme is this expense policy and I'm reusing this expense policy document
So if I go ahead and run that
And this time I'm doing it in Python
Oops, no not like that
Now I'm running it in Python and I can say begin
And
It starts a ridiculous game of dungeons and deductions. Sure. Okay
so you can see here, I
mean, this is really
Pretty bizarre that we can you know, just write two sentences and just get this completely different behavior out of this model
So far all of these examples have just created
Elmer and chatless apps and we've called them from either their built-in chat UIs or or called the chat method from the console
But it's more common I think to take these
Take these customized
Elmer and and chalice instances and build them into a shiny front-end
In R
we have a separate package called shiny chat that you can use to to put a chat bot into your shiny app and
In Python, there's not a separate package. There's a built-in component for shiny for Python called UI dot chat
And I will drop the links for the documentation for both of those in the description as well
It's very easy to do with just a few lines of code you can have Elmer and chatless
Chat bots working very well
Because these are shiny apps they are super easy for you to deploy you can deploy your apps with one click or I guess
You know one command depending on how you do it on
Prem we have a commercial product called posit connect
I
Imagine that many many of you on this call already have access to a posit connect at your company's
Sometimes you may not even know it, but you do
And we also have a cloud hosted service called posit connect cloud
This is sort of the the next generation of shiny apps dot io if you're familiar with that
Oh, I forgot to put on the slide, but we also have open source on-prem hosting with shiny server open source
and
Just like shiny apps are so easy to write and deploy that you could
Often if you're if you're pretty skilled at shiny, or you use shiny assistant, which is our AI assistant for writing shiny apps
It's often worth
creating
Deploying using and throwing away a shiny app. You know all within a week or a day
It's so easy and so fast to do and even more so with Elmer and chatless because it's so easy to create these LLMs
We've definitely found that within posit
We've had a proliferation of internal chat bots that just serve one
Specific purpose and it it would not have been worth the effort to create and especially to deploy
You know a custom chat bot for that one specific purpose. You know like this extent expense report bot
But it's just so easy to do with this technology stack
That that we do it
Couple other Elmer and chatless features that I want to show you
You have the ability to do image as input and the ability to do structured output. I'll come back to that in a moment
you have the ability to not just take a
response as one big string all at once, but you have the ability to kind of take the response as
streams of little chunks of strings and
If you know what async is just know that both Elmer and chatless
work in synchronous or async modes
Just to show you how easy vision is
This is a an image called photo dot JPG when I'm chatting with in this case Claude
It's as simple as instead of passing a string or in addition in addition to passing a string you can pass
the result of content image file and you give it a file name and
You know Claude is able to see this image and tell you what the mood of the image is in a single phrase
This is what it looks like in R and this is what it looks like in Python super easy to do
I will warn you
this is one of those jagged frontier areas where it's
Incredibly sensitive and nuanced to certain aspects of photos and then other things like counting how many objects are in a photo it
Just can't can't do sometimes it's really surprising
So definitely worth playing with though. I won't dwell on this too much. Just know that
These models also often have the ability to not just give you unstructured text back but to give you JSON objects that you can then use
You know for to put into a database or to you know code against for other reasons
So this is what it looks like in R
You kind of specify what kind of data you want back what the shape of the data that you want back and then you call
Chat structured instead of chat and this is what it looks like in Python looks a little bit different here
we're using a package called Pydantic, which is a
de facto standard in the Python world
And we call extract data instead of chat and tell it this is the shape of data that we want
And yeah, instead of getting a string you get back some JSON that is very easy to use from code
The last topic I really I don't have time for this but I'm gonna do it anyway, it's just such an important topic
Tool calling allows LLMs to interact with other systems. So instead of just taking text in and
Giving text back out. It gives the LLMs the ability to call out to
APIs to databases the ability to execute code to do things to your file system
Just all sorts of things that can be possible and that sounds a little bit scary and it sounds complicated
But it is not as bad as you think
So I'm gonna try to explain how this works by first telling you how it doesn't work
This is how when I first heard about this functionality, this is how I imagined it working, but it is not how it works
So one example of something that a pure LLM cannot do an LLM is is just a model
It can't get the current weather, right? You need a weather service for that
So in this case, let's say we have a user as the assistant. What's the weather right now at Fenway Park?
When I heard that there was something called tool calling that lets
LLMs access other systems what I imagined is somehow we would be teaching the assistant to reach out to open weather org
it's a fictional service, but just pretend and
Call
Give me the weather for 0 2 2 1 5
That's the zip code where Fenway Park is
Open weather would return the data as JSON and then the assistant would
Incorporate that JSON into its response and say 65 degrees and sunny. Okay. This is how I imagine it working
But this is not how it works
Instead it works like this
The user asks the question. What's the weather right now at Fenway Park and it includes along with that request a
Description of a tool called get current weather. So it's not passing code. It is just passing metadata about a function
It's saying the name of this function is get current weather
It takes a single argument that argument is a zip code and it's a string
So the assistant instead of answering with what the weather is it?
Instead responds saying I would like to call this tool that you said was available
Called get current weather 0 2 2 1 5 and it is actually the responsibility of the client not the server
To go off and perform this request against openweather.org or however else it wants to
Fulfill the task of getting the current weather
When a response is received then the user continues the conversation
By taking this response that the assistant asked for and sending it to the assistant and the assistant now
it has the original question it sees the request that it sent and it sees a response that came back from the user and
Therefore now it's able to actually give a proper response back to the client
Incorporating this this data. So it seems a lot more complicated, but is actually much simpler
basically
Just just to recap the user asks the assistant a question and includes metadata for tools or functions that are available
The assistant asks the user to invoke a tool on its behalf and passes the arguments that should be used
the user invokes the tool and
Returns the output to the assistant which the assistant can then use as context for its final response
It turns out this is an incredibly general and powerful way to extend the capabilities of these
Of these assistants and anytime you hear the word agent used which is a lot these days
Just know that all of that is made possible by creating these tools and giving LLMs access to them
So another way to think of it is that the client can do things that the assistant can't do like
not only call out to things like a weather service, but
To read and write to databases to put files on disk to turn the lights on and off in a smart home
Anything you can think of doing in code
You can empower the assistant to do and we put the control into the hands of the assistant
so that the assistant can decide when it's appropriate to use what tools and what arguments to pass in and
What to do with the results and it turns out that that's just an incredibly
general and powerful
Capability having that intelligence in using and coordinating these tools
So
Let's take that
You know everything that we've talked about so far. We've talked about
Elmer and chat lists. We've talked about
Shiny apps. We've talked about tool calling
Customizing system prompts. We're going to put all of that together
Into
An example and this is an application that I have demoed before
It's a restaurant tipping app
What you're looking at right now does not involve any LLMs or AI
This is a simple shiny dashboard that lets you you know, move some controls here and it and it updates on the right. So
What we have on the next tab is
a new version of that desktop of that dashboard that does incorporate AI and here we have
We've replaced those controls on the side
With with a chat bot in the sidebar and this chat bot you can ask it filtering questions
Like show only male smokers who had dinner on Saturday and instead of having to move a bunch of sliders
you just you just say what you want in plain English and
What this
What this application does is it doesn't ask the
LLM to
Populate all these outputs on the right. I would never trust an LLM to do that
All we are asking the LLM to do is to fulfill the users
request here by writing sequel
So this sequel is passed as a tool call to the rest of the shiny app
the tool is called update the dashboard with this filter and
you can see here that that we've shown the sequel in two places and
The thing that's key about this is that if the sequel is right
Then everything below it is guaranteed to be right because the only thing
That this chat bot has the ability to influence is
What is the sequel that drives the rest of the app? The rest of the app is just normal shiny reactivity
All of this code is just normal shiny
deterministic code I
Didn't mean to hit that but this is just showing that we you we have a separate feature where we use the LLM to explain
What you're seeing in a plot?
Sorry, what I meant to do was hit this triple dot button and show that like this simple reactive code
It still works
Well, we've narrowed it down to a not very interesting subset, so these are pretty boring views so
But the point is
This is all using the pieces that we've already talked about here with with Elmer and chat lists and and tool
Calling and system prompt customization. We have the ability to
embed really intelligent
Agents into our shiny apps and deploy them. I
Demoed this application
Last year at posit conf and at the time. This was just an example
That you could fork if you wanted to and and replace everything to have your own data
Since then we've made things a lot easier by creating this package called query chat
this is for both our and for Python and is designed to make it dead easy to take these kinds of
Sidebar chat bots that that return reactive data frames using sequel
So it's extremely easy to build your own version of this app with your own data your own
visualizations and your own downstream reactives
Again that's called query chat, and there's documentation for both our and Python here
Well
That's all the time that I have today I
Hope that over the last 30 minutes. You've seen how easy it is to get started with this technology
How easy it is to play with LLMs and ask them to do different things and and just see how it works out
And now is really the time for that now is the time to play with these technologies?
they are coming I mean they are here and
There is a tidal wave of change that's ahead of us and the best thing I can
recommend is that you
Be on the forefront of that change by understanding how these things work what they're good for
what they're really terrible for and
Help guide the future of how we should be using these things especially when it comes to data analysis
There are so many more things happening inside of Posit
Packages and and tools and services
That we are doing that we have already done and released
So I encourage you to stay up to date by following the Posit blog, Heidi Verse blog, Simon Couch's blog
There's just so much
Interesting stuff happening around Posit around AI so we have a lot more interesting announcements coming soon
So stay tuned and with that let's go over to Q&A
You